[Music]
what's the point of philosophy
almost every person unfamiliar with the
subject Beyond its mere existence seems
to hold my mind some version of the idea
but philosophy makes no progress the
claim is that philosophers still debate
the very same things the ancient Greeks
did Socrates Plato Aristotle there have
even been philosophers themselves who
have argued this position
indeed this was the position of the most
famous philosopher of the 20th century
Ludwig Wittgenstein who argued that
philosophy makes no progress and this is
because philosophy essentially is
reducible to little more than language
games there's nothing that philosophy
deals with in reality no actual problems
because actual problems are problems of
science or of history of mathematics say
but philosophy is a domain where the
same questions are encountered over and
over again simply because we fail to
understand the limitations of language
it is language that makes certain things
appear to be problems but they are in
fact not actual problems they're pseudo
problems now this is the position of
Wittgenstein and it is one of the most
popular views in academic philosophy
even today
and a plausible story can be told that
this theory of philosophy the linguistic
School of philosophy which is philosophy
is nothing but language puzzles gave
rise to an inordinate focus upon
language in philosophy broadly
it spawned post-modernism and
deconstructionism the idea that nothing
much can be said in philosophy to
illuminate the truth and so why bother
even striving for clarity if
Wittgenstein had essentially proved the
uselessness of philosophy as an academic
Enterprise is it any Wonder then that so
many migrated away from tackling the big
questions in the tradition of the
ancient Greeks and instead turn to
linguistic Naval gazing or even
linguistic obfuscation if it's all a
Fool's errand why really try happily
wittenstein and those who followed one
only some battles they haven't won the
war there is another perspective
there are philosophers who follow in the
grand tradition of philosophy of
tackling philosophical problems and
making philosophical progress
So to that end I want to summarize a
defense of Philosophy by a Karl Popper
popper is rightly credited with
determining the line of demarcation
between science and non-science is
sometimes remembered as creating a
political philosophy and a defense
against tyranny he or his philosophy is
often maligned utterly wrongly as a
proponent of the idea that claims that
are unscientific are meaningless in
other words the claim is that he himself
was a proponent of something like
scientism
mostly for those of us who value his
contribution we see him as a much too
forgotten philosopher of the First Rate
the best of the 20th century has solved
many problems in philosophy and wrote
far more clearly than almost anyone
before or since on these matters
Papa had much to say in his writings and
lectures over the years about
wittgenstein's position
Papa went to Great Lengths to explain
the flaws of wittgenstein's position in
various places in various books he
rightly understood that Wittgenstein had
given birth to an entirely new school of
philosophy linguistic philosophy and it
was ascendant moreover popper saw great
danger in that approach to philosophy of
all the work he produced on these
matters none come to Bear quite so
directly on the matter Lauren so
concentrated a form as his lecture later
turned into a paper called the nature of
philosophical problems and their roots
in science
this paper that I'm going to be
primarily talking about today is
remarkable because it demonstrates Papa
at his best firstly it demonstrates what
it means to take an argument one
disagrees with even from a disagreeable
person and present it as powerfully as
it can be to take your opponent's point
of view and refine it and express it so
clearly that there would be nothing
whatsoever that the opponent would
object to indeed they might even say wow
that's an articulate and Powerful way to
put it I wish I'd thought of that
this last point is sometimes called
steel Manning these days I can't say
that pop a pie need it but I doubt
anyone has ever been more expert and
dispassionate in doing it for here in
this paper he is responding to his great
rival Wittgenstein
Wittgenstein I must emphasize is revered
by somewhere between many to almost all
philosophers the greatest philosopher of
the 20th century few others can lay
claim to spawning an entire School of
philosophy the linguistic philosophy one
of those few others was of course Papa
himself who spawned critical rationalism
popper and Wittgenstein met only once
that encounters the subject of an entire
book written on the topic and much
folklore and philosophy circles the book
by Edmunds and idenow is called
wittgenstein's poker and it's easily
found on Amazon it's about a discussion
over the very question in Copper's paper
which I'm talking about today and this
paper wouldn't be published until many
years after that encounter with
Wittgenstein and the question is the
central question of the book the central
question of the paper and in various
writings that popper produced on this
topic is are there philosophical
problems
so when Wittgenstein and popper met it
was just a brief exchange between the
two of them in October of 1946 in
Cambridge in the presence of many others
including their teacher and Mentor
Bertrand Russell Wittgenstein held that
all problems thought to be philosophical
were really just pseudo problems they
reduced to problems of language use the
only real problems were mathematical or
scientific ones
popper put the case that there were real
scientific problems the reason the book
is called wickenstein's poker by the way
is because at one point in the accounts
of the witnesses differ here
Wittgenstein lifted a poker to either
move the coals in the fire or to
emphasize a point or perhaps or perhaps
even to threaten popper the extremes
here differ depending upon the witness
telling the tale but that debate and the
book recounts it well is the central
concern of this philosophical paper that
popper wrote in 1952 and published in
the British philosophical Journal so it
was some six years after the encounter
with Wittgenstein at Cambridge and after
wittgenstein's death which happened in
1951 one might even see it as Papa's
tribute to Wittgenstein because as I say
he is still manned wittgenstein's
position as we shall see
now Papa writes exceedingly clearly but
even exceedingly clear professional
philosophy at Papa's level can be
obscure to the novice moreover mere
decades can cause language changes to
the English language such that what was
once clear is now perhaps somewhat
Arcane in places so I want to explain
Papa's paper in my own words why why
bother with such an obscure paper about
an obscure question debated by
philosophers from last Millennium why
now what's the point and what's the
importance of this paper to today some
70 years later well the last few years
has seen post-modernism and relativist
movements go from strength to strength
in the last five years alone we've seen
a surge in nihilistic or pessimistic
politics and rejection of Truth in favor
of a strange Alliance of relativism and
Dogma which might normally be thought as
being at odds with one another and we
have in lockstep with the increase of
the so-called woke movements a recent
increase in the number of academics and
what we might call Allied experts
journalists authors public intellectuals
and so on who have become more and more
vocal about post-modernism and the
movements that follow postmodernism this
is a good thing and it has led to
something of an upsurge in interest by
bloggers and others online about the
culture on University campus this
pushback against post-modernism and the
rejection of finding the truth or even
recognizing there is a truth out there
worth seeking and understanding
questioning and debating and taking
seriously can in many ways be seen to
find its roots in the papa Wittgenstein
divide so I would argue another landmark
that came later was the so-called
so-called hoax and recently we've had
pluck Rose Lindsay and bacosian
repeating the basics of that earlier
Circle study demonstrating the lack of
content or critical analysis of some
academic journals so we've had Jordan
Peterson Sam Harris Douglas Murray
Nicholas christakos just to name a few
of the bright lights of our time writing
or speaking about the problem as it
manifests itself in tertiary education
it has perhaps reached a crescendo sorts
among some students following the
indoctrination of their lecturers who
reject mainstream science or as they
might have called it Western science or
eurocentric or male science and so on so
Peterson bikozian Etc they are concerned
about what is quite perversely called
studies in critical theory I would say
critical only in the very narrow sense
of being critical often unfairly and
dishonestly of Western culture
specifically modern so-called critical
theory is not critical of its own
content unlike let me give a plug here
for papyrian epistemology critical
rationalism which is criticism applied
to everything including itself more
commonly this new critical theory is
more accurately labeled and maligned as
grievance studies
in my own field there's been a recent
push to remove references in physics to
dead white men I'm possibly going to
consider that issue in a blog post soon
but my purpose here now is not to look
at the present concerns about this
rejection of truth and the Embrace of
relativism Douglas Murray's book The
Madness of crowds articulates some of
the most egregious events and serious
effects of that culture Downstream of
Academia and what can happen when
post-modern doctrines are taught and
then taken seriously instead here I
offer Papa's defense of philosophy
broadly and rejection of what might be
called the first seeds of contemporary
relativism it was planted it would seem
by Wittgenstein Wittgenstein it must be
emphasized was no relativist he was a
realist of a kind and certainly embraced
science as a route to truth indeed the
only route he more embraced scientism
really
but he did plant the seeds of relativism
innocently ignorant about what they
would go on to spawn in philosophy and
wider Academia later
this happened because he argued that
philosophy was but a language game he
argued there are no philosophical
problems he argued for the supremacy of
language and in doing so pushed open a
door to so much nonsense and philosophy
and misconception about the purpose of
philosophy as we've already seen this
led to the invention of a whole field of
philosophy the linguistic philosophy and
that led to postmodern deconstruction a
way of undoing meaning taking sense
turning it into nonsense and that and
that led to some of the situations We
Now find ourselves in with race studies
third wave feminism Marxist retellings
and reimaginings and more besides
understanding these moves and some of
the philosophical background can help us
to understand where we're at today
understanding where some of this went
wrong might help us to correct our
course
on my website and linked to this episode
you can find Papa's original paper a
defense against the dark arts of
post-modernism and my commentary upon
that paper
it's meant as an articulation of a
realist position in philosophy
philosophical problems exist and thus so
to do their Solutions throughout my
discussion which I'm going to take one
page at a time thus turning what is a
quite dense 33-page Journal article into
something somewhat more concise and I
hope more simple to read I'll also refer
the reader and listener to
wittgenstein's Poker to provide a little
more of the surrounding background to
this debate and it wouldn't be me unless
I also referred you to the beginning of
infinity in this case chapter 12 a
physicist history of bad philosophy
touches on this and has lots of concise
and humorous remarks about the
philosophical dead end that Wittgenstein
LED large parts of the field down into
together these sources paint a vision of
the seeds of poppers worldview and what
might be said to be some of the Fertile
ground David deutsches used to cultivate
and refine some of this optimistic
vision of reality so of course we begin
on page one of the paper and here pop is
arguing that philosophy like science or
any discipline for that matter is not
distinguished so much by its subject
matter as by the problems that are
investigated so the question what is
philosophy says popper is a rather
pointless one as it leads the questioner
down a road of essentialist answers and
we are bound to end up in arguments
about whether some bit of subject matter
really is philosophical rather than
scientific
over on the second page popper explains
that the reason we separate subjects is
largely due to historical reasons and
matters of administrative convenience
the popular artist Sam Harris follows
popper on this exact point in fact and
has made this point repeatedly for
example where he writes this is from his
website the boundaries between true
intellectual disciplines are currently
enforced by little more than University
budgets and architecture is the Shroud
of Turin a medieval forgery this is a
question of history of course and of
archeology but the techniques of
radiocarbon dating make it a question of
chemistry and physics as well and that's
from Sam harris.org blog item our narrow
definition of science
I think that Sam must have read this
same paper it's got a lot of Echoes of
um Popper's writing here
anyway
um popper explains that the question of
what is philosophy like the question of
what is science or what is geology is
always open to revision because the
subjects always tend towards unification
and we should be students of problems
rather than subjects and problems cut
across disciplines Papa uses the example
of geology the problem of finding
uranium is going to include physics and
chemistry and lots of things Papa then
says that although this view of problems
cutting across disciplines is true
nonetheless problems can still be seen
as a rising out of one subject or
another the second page that he asks his
central question are there philosophical
problems
this is the question that separated him
from Wittgenstein the paper then moves
into proper explaining wittgenstein's
position in wittgenstein's view the
answer is no it's a no because all
actual problems reduced to Scientific
ones in the final analysis philosophical
problems on this view are pseudo
problems a result of misunderstandings
in language rather than anything truly
substantive so philosophy is not a place
where you form theories as such
explanations of reality moral political
epistemological meta scientific and so
on but rather it is an activity where we
simply unmask philosophical nonsense and
papa would agree that unmasking
philosophical nonsense is an important
part of philosophy but not all of it is
reducible to this
I'm up to the fourth page now and proper
flags for us that he's about to explain
defend and then criticize wittgenstein's
position and this is of course
completely in line with his philosophy
of philosophy the arguments of your
opponent should always be put in their
strongest possible terms at least as
well as your opponents would if not
better than what they would but whatever
the case not in the way that you would
expect they would obviously object to
and so this is what some people call
Steel Manning to me there seems to be a
strong form of Steel Manning which means
something like making the case of your
opponent even stronger than what they
intended this doesn't seem to me to be
advisable because that might not be what
your opponent intended but there's a
weaker form of Steel meaning that I
think is uncontroversial and it's
something like popper would endorse
which is to as fairly clearly and
accurately represent the position of one
of your of your opponent in terms they
would not object to papa says here that
a philosopher should do philosophy which
is to say philosophize and not just talk
about philosophy or the work of other
philosophers
this of course is exactly what I'm doing
and what I usually do but in my defense
I'm not purporting to do philosophy here
and now I'm attempting to be a
philosophy Communicator if anything
whatever the case papa says that if he
thought Wittgenstein were correct then
he Papa would give up philosophy talking
about philosophy is clearly not for him
he wants to solve problems in philosophy
that's what drives Papa not waxing
lyrical on the work of others but he
says the reason of course he does talk
about philosophy is eventually to get to
philosophizing which is to say solving
some problems
and I think many of us in the critical
rationalist Community kind of try and do
this we might talk about the work of
other people but it's only so that we
can engage with the academic peasantness
the profits the justificationists the
pseudoscientists and so on so that maybe
we can address some philosophical
problem underpinning them okay to
address the misconceptions and so like
popper if only modestly to make some
Headway towards Clarity on those topics
but you know I myself readily admit I
spend far more time on all the ways
certain ideas are false rather than
making Headway and what is actually true
but moving on this is where popper says
on this page
that the golf between science and
philosophy happens to be a recent one
and that this led to Bertrand Russell
influencing influencing Wittgenstein via
his classification of expressions in a
language into three kinds this is
Russell's classification system he said
that there are true statements false
statements and meaningless ones
so here we've got popper tracing
Wittgenstein to Russell
we can't blame Russell for Wittgenstein
however in the same way we can't blame
Wittgenstein for schools of grievance
study today he'd likely be horrified by
them but it is informative to see the
philosophical roots of these ideas and
thus excavate the underlying era or the
root of the era for it is somewhat like
geology in that respect how was that
metamorphic rock generated it was only
possible given for example the Deep
compression stress and warping of the
other kinds of rocks like sedimentary
igneous in other words the conditions
the local conditions caused this warping
but a metamorphic rock is altogether a
different substance in the igneous rock
that was its chemical precursor but its
Origins are still there imprinted as it
were deep within its deep structure so
it can be with ideas onto the fifth page
and popper explains that part of the
motivation for this was to distinguish
between the false and meaningless
statements as resolutions to logical
paradoxes so the former a merely false
statement might be something like 3
times 4 is 173 but the latter a
meaningless statement could be three
times four are cows
papa says Wittgenstein followed Russell
down this road and concluded that
therefore all philosophy consists of
meaningless statements and this meant
there could not possibly be
philosophical problems alleged problems
in philosophy he categorized into four
kinds
actually logical or mathematical
problems
actually scientific problems
combinations of those first two kinds
and The Fourth Kind meaningless
statements of the kind Russell had said
now here one and two problems being
actual logical problems or problems
being actual scientific problems could
of course be answered by the methods of
mathematics and science popper says that
wittgenstein's proposal here was
ingenious it was an ingenious attempt to
eradicate philosophy and Theology and it
led to the creation of an entirely new
school of philosophy so we just note
here by the way
popper conceding that wittgenstein's
idea of eradicating philosophy with the
help of an adaption of Russell's theory
of types was ingenious and original and
more radical even than Compton's
positivision which it resembles closely
so Papa generously gives Wittgenstein
his Jew he's not berating his
intelligence he's not saying he's silly
or stupid quite the opposite he's
praising his genius he just thinks he's
completely wrong as genius as often can
be or even almost always are like the
rest of us onto the next page and popper
for the first time introduces the
problem versus puzzle dichotomy remember
popper believes in genuine problems in
philosophy open deep questions about
reality whose Solutions must be drawn
from philosophical theories whose
purpose it is to solve problems just as
scientific theories solve scientific
problems but this new school of language
analysis that Wittgenstein founded said
that all such problems were apparent
only in fact they were language puzzles
and if you figured out where the
language went wrong the puzzle would be
solved and the apparent problem would
vanish
papa says he fails to understand why
language analysts would even want to do
that job if that is what philosophy
amounted to it seems like it's pointless
why do philosophy if it's not about deep
problem solving and instead is about
puzzle solving like spending your work
day doing crosswords or something
admits here that he understands some of
the motivation after all many people
speak nonsense and write nonsense
especially dangerous nonsense and here
he alludes to philosophy that leads to
terrible political ideas like communism
or Fascism and of course today we would
speak about post-modernism and critical
theories and other kinds of work
activism but then again also some of
that even when say it's nonsense only
because it's poorly worded might contain
some Truth worth listening to in other
words not all nonsense is meaningless
it's as if popper is claiming that some
people who might not speak or write
carefully what he's saying to them is
well what you've said there strictly is
nonsense given your Paul grammar however
I understand what you're trying to get
at and your central point is
understandable and perhaps it's even
true
popper also uses the example here of
calculus and Mathematics which when it
was first discovered probably same to
every other mathematician as nonsense
calculus is the mathematics and
continuous change until Newton and
leibnitz invented it mathematics was
largely about geometry and Counting or
algebra but calculus introduces the idea
of limits and Infinities of various
kinds and infinitesimals in order to
understand the concept of continuous
change the point here might also be
something that might seem to be nonsense
to you or in some sense a contradiction
to you might nonetheless contain truth
and be used to solve problems as of
course calculus can one might be tempted
to say that there is almost no area of
physical science left untouched by
calculus
papa says here that it's understandable
that people looked at the high Precision
language of mathematics and compared it
to the vagueness of philosophical
language
and this was impressive to the followers
of Wittgenstein but popper observed had
there been a Wittgenstein at the time
when calculus was first created he
possibly might have attempted to
eradicate the whole calculus project
because of its similar vagueness as it
was only understood vaguely like all new
discoveries are when they were first
discovered
the most famous statement ever uttered
by Wittgenstein comes next whereof one
cannot speak thereof one must be silent
and papa quotes Irwin shreddinger's
reply
and trading a set of Wittgenstein but it
is only here that speaking becomes
interesting wittgenstein's original
quote there seems to have been
interpreted in many ways firstly in the
strong sense it can be used to dismiss
all of metaphysics and Theology and two
and this is probably the way
Wittgenstein intended in a weaker sense
it can be used to admit that there do
exist phenomena metaphysical or
spiritual for which no words are
adequate and can only possibly mislead
and therefore we should partition off
statements about the world our use of
language to be about things that are
empirically true or false
so I I think that's the correct reading
of Wittgenstein I don't think
Wittgenstein in the same way that popper
um argued that metaphysics was
irrelevant or useless or not a real
domain of inquiry it's just that in
Papa's case he thought they weren't
scientific statements but were still
valuable and in VidCon science case he
thought they were it was valuable to
think of these ideas perhaps but you
just couldn't speak about them there was
no point debating metaphysics because
they weren't questions which could be
settled empirically
now moving on to page seven popper
agrees that we should strive for clarity
but that language analysis could be used
as a technique whereby scientific texts
could be shown to be filled with
meaningless pseudo-propositions and
tautologies
so when you apply language analysis to
Scientific work it might show that
scientific work is itself meaningless
popper here defends Wittgenstein he
begins with an admission but much of
philosophy is meaningless verbiage and
that Wittgenstein did something to
correct this although Papa thinks
Russell probably deserves as much credit
or more credit for this because he had
such a lucid Style
papa says that Wittgenstein is correct
that some schools of philosophy
degenerate in such a way that its
problems can become practically
indistinguishable from the pseudo
problems Wittgenstein says they actually
are
popper argues that this is a consequence
of philosophical imbreading where the
philosophers search for issues within
the subject of philosophy to the
exclusion of those arising from outside
philosophical problems in mathematics
politics religion or science for example
Papa presents his first thesis
and the first thesis is genuine
philosophical problems are always rooted
in Urgent problems outside philosophy
and they die if the roots Decay so
popper argues that philosophers get
sidetracked when they think there is
some method to philosophy that is like
some recipe which produces truth if only
you follow it carefully on to the next
page page eight
Papa speaks about how methods do not
matter in philosophy what matters is
careful attention paid to and passion
for problems
Papa distinguishes two kinds of thinkers
those who like problems people who feel
that the problem is so real it is like a
disorder they just have to get out of
their system it is all-consuming
and on the other hand those who just
apply some technique already known which
is to say puzzle solvers here he's
agreeing with Wittgenstein that such
puzzles indeed exist and there are
people who pursue them even in
philosophy but it just disagrees with
Wittgenstein that all problems in
philosophy are ultimately puzzles in
language
Potter makes the point that philosophy
education is idiosyncratic in this
Regard in philosophy we give Learners
The Works of the great philosophers the
Greeks the Europeans the big names
between Plato and Descartes Mill
the student reads these and then
discusses the readings abstractly and
more perversely might attempt to
reconstruct the way those Dead
Philosophers wrote usually circuitously
and confusingly because they were not
because those original philosophers were
not too sure of exactly how to conjure
the language to write clearly themselves
David Deutsch makes this point as well
that philosophy unlike physics or any
area of science to which it is more
closely related than say English
literature because science is a
problem-solving process while literature
is an appreciation process
philosophy is obscure in the way we read
the original texts
but no physics student would ever learn
relativity from Einstein's initial
writings on the topic they'd pick up a
modern text why shouldn't a philosophy
student do the same and solve
philosophical problems like a physics
student solves physics problems
in truth though much of physics learning
is also sadly puzzles of the kind of
Wittgenstein complained about a known
method applied to a situation where the
result is already known beforehand
on to the next page and papa says he
understands how a competent philosophy
student might come to wittgenstein's own
conclusion philosophy seems to have a
peculiar jargon and a set of techniques
which once learned makes one feel as
though they have mastered the puzzle
solving as well as anyone else and this
is a captivating thing papa says it is
dangerously captivating because it leads
straight to the conclusion that
philosophy then is easily interpreted as
being Much Ado About Nothing just a lot
of nonsense of course Papa thinks this
is mistaken but is the result of
learning philosophy in the traditional
matter
Papa doesn't dismiss the study of
ancient philosophers I mean he did as
much of this as anyone else of course
but says that a true understanding of
the problems that motivated them is only
properly gained by studying the relevant
history of the time the history of
mathematics and science which these
philosophers were often animated to be
writing about
so philosophers need to be familiar with
those fields to understand the problems
and therefore understand the
philosophies built to tackle those
problems so I'll say that again in my
own words philosophers really need to be
familiar with
problems within Science and Mathematics
in order to appreciate the philosophical
problems in those areas at a given time
and so today there are philosophical
problems at the heart of physics and
Mathematics but philosophers can only
make a contribution to these
philosophical problems if they're
familiar with philosophy with with
science and with mathematics proper
emphasizes that Wittgenstein is right
that so much a philosophy as practice is
consumed by a concern about
non-philosophical problems and
Wittgenstein is right to reject
philosophy as it is largely practiced
pop her on page 10 then goes on to
expound upon wittgenstein's Doctrine
which is that pure philosophical
problems do not exist because the
purerer it becomes the more is lust of
its original significance and
degenerates into empty verbalism
now popper in contrast says but they do
exist genuine philosophical problems as
well as scientific problems some
problems in philosophy can have factual
components but might not be scientific
and even if they can be solved by Logic
they are not problems of logic he refers
to reader to comments on page two where
problems in science cut across
boundaries of science
Papa refers to cosmology as an example
there the problems have been
philosophical and so Wittgenstein will
presumably rule them out as meaningless
or as puzzles of language I would guess
for example that the question about
whether the universe was infinite or
finite would be a question that
Wittgenstein might have regarded as
perverse at some point but now of course
it is more a scientific question than
one of metaphysics whatever the case the
fact the origins and evolutions of the
whole universe are now more closely
Allied to physics than to philosophy
does not mean that at one time the
questions were not meaningful and in
actuality being meaningful could not be
addressed by non-scientific means
because no scientific means we're
available at the time indeed today we
now have Precision Instruments for
measuring cosmological parameters we can
say that cosmology is most definitely a
science
so much for the two Fields science in
the form of cosmology and philosophy
being entirely separate popper says that
wittgenstein's Doctrine as a result of
his thesis that there are two and only
two classes of statements
synthetic are posteriori which are
things true after the fact the truths of
science or history for example and
analytic up priori logical statements
like the truths of mathematics
just as a side note here I should throw
in a quick
um a lecture of mine who was a great fan
of Wittgenstein as many of the
philosophy Department out at the
University of New South Wales were
he would bring up this quip about
whether or not there can be synthetic
upriori statements
for example what's the length of a meter
it's true by definition but it could
have been otherwise I'll just dwell on
that esoteric concern
um about philosophical jargon for a
moment the synthetic analytic
distinction is about whether a statement
is true by definition or not analytic
statements are simply True by definition
like bachelor's a male The Bachelor bit
already contains the male bit in it
the apriori are posteriori distinction
is about whether something is true from
experience a posterioro or independent
of experience a priori
so the quirky interesting case here is
that some things can be true by
definition
but also true only from experience
so the quirky interesting case here is
can some things be true by definition
but also true only from experience
which means something occurring in the
world
well the interesting example is the
length of the meter the length of the
meter is a meter by definition but it
could have been some other length okay
it could have been half the length that
it was but a meter was always a meter
now popper in fact has a footnote on
this page here and says that
wittenstein's insistence of a
two-pronged delineation of statements is
too simple and he but he doesn't give an
example so I would say the length of the
meter example probably accomplishes that
uh I'm now up to page 11 and so Papa now
gets into specific examples of how there
are indeed philosophical problems and we
need to go outside of philosophy to see
why his first example is about Plato's
theory of forms and this is one that
we're going to spend quite a while
trying to get a handle on
essentially it's the idea that there is
a world beyond the physical world it
might be Supernatural or not it doesn't
need to be but it is a world of ideas
or better yet ideals and the physical
world is just an imperfect manifestation
of that other world
now if you completely strip what popper
calls the problem situation away it
might seem to be a fairly silly concern
to worry some to worry yourself with
but we can only look at this question of
whether or not a realm of forms exists
and whether a theory of forms is
required if we put ourselves back at the
time when Plato was trying to understand
what was happening in broader Greek
thought at the time
the Greeks were trying to understand the
nature of matter so it was a scientific
question they were trying to understand
but it is a philosophical problem as to
whether the forms exist or not and onto
the next page popper connects this
theory of forms to the Pythagorean
notion that all is number that came
earlier strangely perhaps Plato's theory
of forms really arose out of an
understanding about the irrationality of
the square root of two this means two
cannot be represented as a fraction and
I'll put my own version of the proof on
my website
Pythagoras and the pythagoreans argued
that all is number
because they were impressed by musical
ratios that were mathematical or how the
leaves on a tree could be folded to form
a cross and the length of the sides of
the leaves were Pythagorean Triads like
three four five or five twelve thirteen
Etc onto page 13 we get this idea that
shapes fundamental shapes like squares
and triangles
are produced by adding simple numbers
and these numbers are called nomens
which are the numbers added to a figure
to generate some pattern so for example
if you take the square numbers so 0 1 4
9 16 25 in other words
zero squared one squared 2 squared 3
squared 4 squared five squared well each
of those numbers differ one from the
next by the sequence one three five
seven okay the odd numbers and if you
add these numbers together you get the
square numbers again so
one plus three is four one plus three
plus five is nine and so on so your the
sum of the odd numbers produces the
square numbers
or more formally we say the sum of the
first n odd numbers adds up to N squared
a similar thing happens with triangular
numbers where the differences between
the Triangular numbers makes the sum of
the first and natural numbers the
Triangular numbers are 1 3 6 10 Etc how
you make a triangular number is you take
a single dot that's your first
triangular number and then you take
three dots and you form them into the
shape of a triangle and that's the
number three and then to make the next
triangular number will you add three
more dots to the base of that triangle
that you've already drawn and you end up
with six dots so in other words you're
making your drawing pictures of
triangles using dots and that's what the
Triangular numbers are
and so you've got one three six ten
Etc the differences between those
numbers you get a new sequence you get
one you get one plus two you get one
plus two plus three so you're adding up
and popper goes on to continue this
example to explain other more
complicated cases and then the extension
to three dimensions so to create
pyramidal numbers we just add the
Triangular numbers for a triangular
pyramid or a tetrahedral number as
they're called so you end up with one
four ten twenty and they're the sums of
the first n triangular numbers so
remember what the Triangular numbers are
one one plus three one plus three plus
six one plus three plus six plus ten so
to generate a shape or a form we're
doing nothing but arithmetic okay so
this comes from Pythagoras it bleeds
through into Plato all you're doing to
generate shapes you can draw pictures of
these things using little dots and in
poppers paper you can see the pictures
of the little dots uh and in fact that
goes all the way to back to the
pythagoreans
what we say is that the shapes are
generated by the Numbers they take
seriously the idea that any shape is
just generated by iteratively adding
particular numbers and the numbers that
you're adding are called the known ones
now so therefore are all shapes
reducible to numbers well this is the
underlying problem that faced Plato and
this very much leads to the so-called
reality of abstractions
so having established that numbers have
a real and autonomous reality that is in
some sense prior to the physical world
Plato then extended the notion to other
abstract Concepts to other abstract
Concepts Beyond just numbers so popular
remarks are this method of generating
shapes by the addition of dots could go
some way to explaining why the Ancients
turned to the night sky
and found the dots the stars there and
formed them into a zodiac of
supernatural beings Perhaps it is the
case that a line is just another
arrangement of dots and thus has a
number
or a scorpion is just a number
so the forms are the Heavenly shapes of
all objects and so we are led to the
notion of even abstract ideas having an
autonomous reality as with their
opposites so you have Justice and
Injustice good and bad odd and Eve and
male and female Health and Beauty and
Etc
the ideals are thus the domain of
certainty and of a higher reality which
is unchanging because it is perfect but
the visible world is in flux and it's
changing
and so we cannot obtain certain
knowledge of it because there are no
certainties here papa says that on
Plato's view what can be obtained in the
place of knowledge more correctly so we
have to be careful here when I use the
word knowledge more often than not in
this paper we're talking about the Greek
concept of epistemic which is certain
truth
um so what can be obtained in the place
of that this certain truth are only the
plausible but uncertain or prejudiced
opinions more commonly these are called
a doctor or seeming or fallible Mortals
onto page 16 and popper explains how the
pythagoreans considered that because all
was number when we find a length or
measure what is really going on is we
are counting numbers the number of
invisible little dots
now because we cannot possibly see the
little dots a measurement reveals by an
indirect method a ratio of natural
numbers
probably makes some remarks here about
Pythagoras's Theorem namely that the
pythagoreans were not aware of any
geometrical proof of the theorem and nor
was Plato however they were able to get
close to an arithmetical proof of the
theorem so long as they assumed all
numbers were rational of course crisis
now loomed because as is famous in
mathematical folklore the pythagoreans
discovered the irrationality of root 2.
if there could exist a thing such as
irrational numbers then there was no
ratio of sides for all triangles the
little dots were insufficient to the
task and base reality couldn't be number
in this way in particular a square could
be drawn with side length 1 and the
diagonal was a number that could not be
expressed as a fraction or a simple
ratio Papa does mention that early on
these are rationalities like root 2
we're not even recognized as numbers
they were just magnitudes whatever that
might mean popper emphasizes that these
dot diagrams of the pythagoreans seem to
be proto-atomic Theory and may have
influenced Democritus are there
influences upon early atomic theory were
Zeno and in both cases they were seeking
to explain change
pop says that some of the early thinkers
like parmanitis were theoretical
physicists utilizing a hypothetical
deductive system they recognized that
facts of experience could rule out their
theories and so they incrementally
improved them as time went on in the
case of Parmenides he concluded change
was impossible and so all we thought was
change was merely apparent this is not
such a silly idea for an early thinker
because if something called X changes
then X the thing at the beginning of the
change remains at the end or else X
ceases to be and we cannot say x changes
but rather something like X ceases to B
and something else comes into being say
why but that is just to say that X
exists and then y exists so X did not
change and nor did y so this is my
version by the way of the no change as
possible thesis
so pulmonates concludes change is
impossible however these early attempts
at creating fundamental theories in
terms of formal number really were not
physical theories
the first of these was Democritus atomic
theory even so with parmanieri's theory
of no change one might consider
Einstein's four-dimensional space-time
as being a theory of no change all parts
of space-time past and future are there
equally real that we experience change
is just an artifact of our Consciousness
a fact about observers are not about
physical reality The Observer just
becomes aware of the different space
times that we're always there and are
unchanging on page 17 popper fleshes out
parmanitis theory of of no change some
more and I'm going to read directly from
the paper here because it is um
a six line proof of for what that
amounts to
one
only what is is
two
what is not doesn't exist
three not being that is the void does
not exist
four the world is full
five
so the world has no parts it is one huge
block because it's full
six motion is impossible since there is
no empty space into which anything could
move
now given five and six are contradicted
by facts because motion is possible we
see it and the world does have parts
then we can refute the remainder of the
argument we can work backwards so six
given there is motion then five the
world must have Parts it's not one but
many therefore four
the world cannot be full and three the
void or non-being do exist
now Democritus he saw this argument
um this argument about indivisibility
but he applied it to atoms rather than
the universe as a whole
he took his atoms as being objects that
were full and had no void inside
the point of this is that now it
permitted a rational understanding of
change
the world is avoid with atoms moving
within it
all changes the rearrangement of atoms
and thus changes about movement in the
void
since the only kind of novelty that is
possible is that of rearrangement then
it would be possible in principle to
predict future States provided we
managed to predict the motion of Point
masses
finally we're up to page 20 now
and it's here that Democritus theory of
change is explored in more detail a
theory which sets the scene for later
developments in the physical sciences
proper remarks that democratous theory
of change was embraced by Plato but not
by Aristotle Aristotle developed
essentialism the idea that substances
had an Essence that was unchanging but
they also had a potential which did
change
Aristotle's theory failed to influence
physics but to Market his idea that all
changes movement had a massive influence
all the way through to today with one
important exception David Deutsch's
Constructor Theory where change is most
fundamentally about possible versus
impossible transformations of which
movement is an emergent case
Papa does observe that some change like
the forces of Newton or the fields of
Faraday and Maxwell were not necessarily
explicitly about movement
uh Papa writes on this page quote thus
we have a most interesting situation a
philosophy of change designed to meet
the difficulty of understanding change
rationally serves Sciences for thousands
of years but is ultimately superseded by
the development of science itself and
this fact passes practically unnoticed
by philosophers who are busily denying
the existence of philosophical problems
end quote so he's uh having a dig at Vic
and significant science followers there
Papa Praises democratous solution to the
problem of what causes changes being the
framework within which properly
scientific problems could be solved and
thus we had an understanding of
combustion and sound the hardness of
material State changes in thermal
physics and so on all from democritus's
attempt to provide a solution
to whether or not Mata had a fundamental
nature namely an indivisible form Papa
goes on to explain how democratus atomic
theory established a philosophical
methodological rule a theory or
explanation needed to be in agreement
with experience this is key
it's not quite falsificationism it's
prior even to that
unlike with Aristotle who seem to reject
experiment in favor of so-called pure
reason Democritus physics proceeded on
the assumption that explanations must be
connected to our experiences or
observations of the world
also pabra observes you that speculative
theories about the invisible World
Democritus atoms could be accepted or
rejected based upon observations of the
visible world and here we have the
beginnings of the insightful way David
Deutsch puts the issue that often very
often science is about explaining the
scene in terms of the Unseen this
philosophy says Papa the philosophy of
being able to observe the scene as a
check on theories about the Unseen is a
solution that defends science against
relativistic and positivistic tendencies
let's just recall that a relativistic
tendency is one which inclines one to
reject truth or observational reality
while the positivistic tendency is one
which inclines one to endorse the
reality only of what can be observed or
which comes to us via our senses and
nothing else so to postulate the Unseen
would be anti-positivistic
Papa then introduces what he calls the
most fascinating element in democritus's
doctrine that of the quantization of
space and time is there a shortest
distance is there a shortest interval of
time
over on page 22 the motivation for
democrators assuming there was a
smallest possible
time and space was a response to the
paradoxes or problems Xeno
how can I pick up my teacup if there is
a literally infinite number of points
between my hand and the teacup and to
move from one point to the next take
some finite amount of time won't that
sum to an infinite amount of time
well popper introduces the story of the
discovery of the irrationality of Route
2. this is relevant papa says because it
dealt a fatal blur to atomism as applied
to space
and so now I'm just going to basically
put into my own words
um
an explanation for the significance of
the irrationality of root 2 on these
early thinkers the existence of root 2
means some lengths cannot be written
down as fractions or integers in
particular they cannot be written down
as multiples of the shortest possible
length this idea that measurement must
be about counting points so in
democritus's view all shapes or lengths
are just these made up of these
indivisible smallest possible points and
you can put two points at distance the
shortest possible distance one from
another
so that idea that it's just about
counting points when you're measuring
things cannot be possible it can be
shown that some lengths are irrational
no finite number of dots can represent
the length that would mean
but this was the prevailing view up
until that moment the discovery of root
2. if there is a smallest possible
length then any length must consist of a
finite number of atomic distances okay
Atomic distance smallest possible
distance
but if the distance is root 2 or any
irrational number we cannot possibly
have a sequence of dots that sums
precisely to root 2. the simple example
if we made a square with a side length
of the smallest possible length so one
Atomic distance so to speak then what's
the length of the diagonal well the
length of the diagonal is root 2.
but that can't be measured in atomic
lengths
it would be exactly root 2 Atomic
lengths an amount that could not be
represented by dots okay root 2 is 1.4
something or other so it would be one
smallest possible length plus a little
less than half the smallest possible
length well this is a strict
contradiction how can you have half a
smallest possible length that would be
smaller than the smallest possible
length
popper explains that Plato noticed this
fact and it is Papa's belief that
Plato's theory of forms was strongly
influenced by it
Plato didn't agree with Democritus but
he had some sympathy with him and his
Academy did teach the theory of
Democritus Papa writes that Plato
realized that the purely arithmetical
view of reality that all is number the
Pythagorean Vision could not possibly be
true and this is why Plato built upon
that and took elements of Democritus
Zone Theory to develop his theory of
forms ultimately this led to a new
mathematical formulation of reality
another platonist who followed Plato
Euclid
onto the next page 24 popper lays out
his case clearly so I'm just going to
quote from the paper here I'm just going
to read part of the paper here
and papa writes quote
what are the facts I shall try to put
them all together briefly
one pythagoreanism and atomism in
Democritus form were both fundamentally
based on arithmetic that is on Counting
two play to emphasize the catastrophic
character of the discovery of the
irrationals three he inscribed over the
door of the academy nobody untrained in
Geometry may enter my house but geometry
according to Plato's immediately
immediate pupil Aristotle as well as to
Euclid treats of incommensurables or
irrationals in contradistinction to
arithmetic which deals of the odd and
the even
four within a short time after Plato's
death his school produced in Euclid's
elements a worker's main point was that
it freed mathematics from the
arithmetical Assumption of it
commensurability or rationality 5. Plato
himself contributed to this development
especially to development of solid
geometry
sex more especially he gave in the
timelius one of his writings a
specifically geometrical version of the
formerly purely arithmetical atomic
theory that is a vision which
constructed the elementary particles the
famous platonic bodies out of triangles
which Incorporated the irrational square
roots of two and three
in most other respects he preserved both
Pythagorean ideas as well as some of the
most important ideas of Democritus at
the same time he tried to eliminate
democratus's void for he realized that
motion remains possible even in a full
world provided motion is conceived of as
the character of vortices in a liquid
thus he retains some of the most
fundamental ideas of pomonides seven
Plato encouraged the construction of
geometrical models of the world
and especially models explaining
planetary movements Euclid's geometry
was not intended as an exercise in pure
geometry as is now usually assumed but
as a theory of the world ever since
Plato and Euclid but not before it has
been taken for granted that geometry
rather than arithmetic is the
fundamental instrument of all physical
explanations and descriptions of the
theory of matter as well as of cosmology
popper concludes that Plato's stereo
forms was not not meant to be a merely
mathematical exercise it was meant to be
a theory of the world so it led to this
idea that we could even understand
physics in terms of the motion of
planets orbits as being about shapes as
being about geometry
over on page 25 Papa writes that all of
the preceding section amounts to an
argument that Plato was solving a
philosophical problem about what base
reality was like so a question of
ontology or metaphysics this wasn't
strictly physics or mathematics but it
laid the foundation for so much of the
physics that came afterwards from Euclid
aristarchus Archimedes Copernicus Kepler
Galileo Descartes Newton Maxwell and
Einstein this world view of an approach
to epistemology as being informed by
geometry that the base reality emerged
from perfect forms was a philosophical
worldview that helped in the formulation
of science that came much later and only
happened because of the problems Plato
was trying to solve with respect to
inconsistencies between democritus's
atomism as applied to space and the
discovery of the irrationality of root
2. as Papa writes quote this approach
transforms a fundamentally theological
idea the idea of explaining the visible
World by a postulated invisible world
into a fundamental instrument of
theoretical science I end quote proper
credits Democritus with this notion that
visible matter was to be explained by
hypotheses about Invisibles about an
invisible structure which is too small
to be seen
and paparazz quote with Plato this idea
is consciously accepted and generalized
the visible world of change is
ultimately to be explained by an
invisible world of unchanging forms or
substances or essences or Natures as we
shall see geometrical shapes or figures
End quotes
on to page 26 Papa then asks of this
idea about the invisible structure of
matter
is it a physical or a philosophical idea
he says that if a physicist acts on the
theory perhaps without even being
conscious of it accepting the problems
of his subject he might produce new
theories of matter in that case he is
not a philosopher but a physicist but if
he was to reject that philosophy that
Mata has an invisible structure then
what he is doing is plainly philosophy
so Bishop Berkeley and ernstmark did
this kind of thing Mark rejected if you
might remember from the beginning of
infinity he rejected the idea that atoms
could exist because he could not see
them
Papa then says to worry further about
whether we are properly labeling
something as philosophy or physics is
wittgenstein's problem it is one of
linguistic usage and so is indeed a
pseudo problem
Papa then turns to making some final
remarks about Plato's theory of the
structure of matter in Plato's view the
smallest solids are crystal-like
Elementary particles and in turn these
particles have faces which are simple
shapes hence we have atoms made of
platonic solids and platonic solids made
of simple shapes he goes further the
simple shapes squares or hexagons and so
on are themselves ultimately all
composed of two Elementary triangles the
half Square the ice also known as the
isosceles rectangular which has a
hypotenuse of root 2 and the half
equilateral which has a root 3 side
length so we incorporate the irrationals
into our new platonic atomic theory the
triangles are the copies of the
unchanging forms or ideas on this View
so it seems clear that atomism can
incorporate irrationals and we can once
again have a fundamental theory of
matter without contradiction a hole in
the theory that Plato seems to have
recognized is that not all shapes can
necessarily be made with tessellating
those two triangles indeed Euclid showed
that more than just Roots two and three
were needed to specify any odd length
lengths were not just multiples of those
Plato seems to hint that he understood
this possibility this in turn seems to
have caused Aristotle to realize that
Plato hadn't solved the problem he
thought he had he seems to have just
introduced democratus's problem of
shortest possible distances but now it
was root 2 and 3 instead so not
everything could be shown to be a
multiple not every length could be shown
to be a multiple of root two and three
so Aristotle seems to have thought
Plato's theory was the same as the
Pythagorean theory with a bit of a tweak
ultimately though Aristotle was not
particularly interested in mathematics
so he didn't write much about it on to
page 29 and in summary popper writes
that Plato's stereo forms was somewhat
of a restatement of the Theory's
Democritus and the pythagoreans in light
of his understanding of the irrationals
and this in emancipated geometry from
arithmetic by encouraging this
emancipation Plato laid the groundwork
for Euclid the most important deductive
system ever constructed says popper and
thus we can draw a relatively straight
line to aristarchus Newton and Einstein
all of whom use the toolbox of Euclid
popper wrote quote the Calamity of Greek
atomism was thus transformed into a
momentous achievement but Plato's
scientific interests are partly
forgotten the problem situation in
science which gave rise to its
philosophical problems is little
understood and its greatest achievement
the geometrical theory of the world has
influenced our world picture to such an
extent that we unconsciously take it for
granted end quote
so all of that is about the fundamental
nature of matter and that was the
problem the philosophical problem that
Plato was engaged in trying to solve and
it led ultimately to a theory of
geometry which informed science today
and had Plato not tried to solve that
philosophical problem progress would
have been hampered popper then turns to
a second example of a philosophical
problem he says there are many examples
that he could have used but he's going
to use can't he says that kant's
critique a pure reason is one of the
most difficult books I've written papa
says can't wrote too quickly and about
an insoluble problem
it's not a pseudo problem but an
inscapable problem which arose out of
contemporary concerns in physics
can't wrote for an audience familiar
with Newton and even the history leading
to Newton from Copernicus through to
Galileo popper writes that it can be
hard for us today to appreciate the
psychological impact of Newtonian
physics upon the early thinkers modeled
after Euclid the gravitational force of
attraction was felt to be bordering on
the occult it had no explanation after
all it doesn't even have an explanation
today though one was initially demanded
eventually though the success of
Newton's theory was sufficient to have
it accepted because of its power to
predict to near Perfection where other
contenders who tried to make similar
predictions completely failed
Papa tries to give a sense of what it
must have been like for those early
thinkers to have it Dawn upon them that
Newton's theory is actually true it was
a unique event says popper one that
could never be repeated the first and
final discovery of the absolute truth of
the universe mankind had obtained
knowledge real and certain Divine
epistemic or sientia not merely doxa Not
Mere opinion
so for can't Newton's theory was simply
true absolutely true and it remained
this way in the opinion of every single
thinker for 50 years after kant's death
but can't himself although he at first
embraced this notion of certain truth
became unsettled about it upon
encountering Hume
what Hume taught and what he taught
can't was that there could be no certain
knowledge what we knew must be obtained
with the help of observations and
observations of particular cases so our
knowledge would always be uncertain so
Kant in his mind had a contradiction of
sorts on the one hand
hume's contention that repeated
observations do not guarantee knowledge
and that's how knowledge must come to us
so we can't get certain knowledge but on
the other hand the absolute perfection
and certainty of Newton's Theory so
can't ask the question essentially of
Newton's Theory
here is a bit of knowledge some certain
truth Newton's theory is knowledge
but how could it be obtained it has been
obtained but how
the question was inescapable but also
insoluble insoluble because the idea
that Newton's Theory contained epistemo
that is to say certain knowledge are
incontrovertible knowledge we now know
that to be false but can't didn't know
that no one did so it was a real and
open question as to how it was possible
to ever obtain it at all given all we
had were observations of the world
there is a philosophical problem if ever
there was one how is knowledge possible
how is knowledge creation possible
now we now know that Newton's theory is
knowledge just not epistema it's
conjectural Papa solve that for us papa
says we now know Newton's hypothesis was
just that and astonishingly good
approximation unique for sure but not
Divine and perfect it is doxa in the
final analysis not epistemic
Papa writes the cart's own solution to
his problem was a strange mix of
absurdity and Truth he tried to say that
our minds impose physical laws onto
reality we produce laws in the same way
we kind of digest food it's natural for
us to somehow find in these laws to find
these laws in our own minds
and then impose them upon nature so the
the scheme seem to work like this our
sensors gather data these in our mind
form themselves into mathematical
relationships and these we can then
impose upon nature
so Kant is suggesting that natural
science is not merely possible it is
necessary given our mental makeup it
then becomes rather amazing to can't why
it took so long for Newton to make this
discovery and it is an absolute mystery
why everyone else didn't
everyone else has a digestive system
converting food to waste so why aren't
the rest of us converting perceptions
into mathematical laws papa says we
cannot dismiss this all so easily even
though it might sound absurd it's no
pseudo problem the question of how
knowledge is possible popper frames this
as the question how are successful
hypotheses possible
now Papa writes his own preparing answer
so I'm just going to read it from
beginning to end here in full
I can't improve upon him quote how are
successful policies a successful
hypotheses possible because as you said
he's responding to Kanti as you said we
are not passive receptors of sense data
but active organisms because we react to
our environment not always merely
instinctively but sometimes consciously
and freely because we can invent myths
stories theories because we have a
thirst for explanation an insatiable
curiosity a wish to know because we not
only invent stories and theories but try
them out and see whether they work and
how they work because by a great effort
by trying hard and erring often we may
sometimes if we are lucky succeed in
hitting upon a story an explanation
which saves the phenomena perhaps by
making up a myth about Invisibles such
as atoms or gravitational forces which
explain the visible because knowledge is
an adventure of ideas these ideas it is
true are produced by us and not by the
world around us they're not merely the
traces of repeated Sensations or stimuli
or whatnot hear you were right but we
are more active and free than even you
believe it for similar observations or
similar environmental situations do not
as your theory implied produce similar
explanations in different men
nor is the fact that we originate our
theories and that we attempt to impose
them upon the world and explanation of
their successes as you believe
for an overwhelming majority of our
theories of our freely invented ideas
are unsuccessful they do not stand up to
searching tests and are discarded as
falsified by experience only a few of
them succeed for a time in the
competitive struggle for survival end
quote so that that's that's glorious
that is Papa there wishing he could
speak to Kant and that's what he would
have said to can't about can't own
philosophy
and on the final page popper says that
people today seem to have forgotten
kant's problem situation
what he can't was trying to solve was a
deep question about epistemology that
popper himself made progress upon so in
all these cases this philosophizing that
went on was not simply science or
mathematics it was motivated by
particular problems in those areas but
it was not identical to those areas it
was deeper and prior in a sense to
purely scientific or mathematical
questions can matter be reduced to
nothing but indivisible points or atoms
does this mean lengths two must be
quantized but what then for a rational
length papa says that many philosophers
inherited kant's terrible style of
writing but have failed to try and
understand his problem situation they
are simply riffing on Kant or the work
of other philosophers rather than
looking at problems outside philosophy
that have philosophical content
and in conclusion proper writes quote we
must be aware of mistaking the well nice
senseless and pointless subtleties of
the imitators for the pressing and
genuine problems of the pioneer we
should remember that his problem
although not an empirical one in the
ordinary sense nevertheless turned out
unexpectedly to be in some sense factual
can't called such facts transcendental
since it arose from apparent but
non-existent instance of sientia or
episteme and we should I submit
seriously consider the suggestion that
can't answer in spite of its partial
absurdity contain the nucleus of a
philosophy of science
end quote so that's quite amazing I
think popper gives can't his due there
he was striving to understand how
knowledge was possible he can't was
trying to understand how knowledge was
possible because he thought Newton's
theory of gravity was certain truth but
he also understood that the means by
which we seem to come to understand the
world was through observations and yet
assume observed this could not possibly
generate certain truth popper is saying
that Kant was dealing with a genuine
problem a problem I'd submit Papa solved
in large part knowledge is generated by
iterative cycles of conjecture and
refutation and remains knowledge remains
conjectural and it's an approximation to
reality but popper says kant's uneasy
style of writing has been emulated by
other philosophers I guess in his mind
he was thinking of Wittgenstein
so what we have here ultimately is
Papa's concern that philosophy was being
reduced to nothing but concerns over
language that was exactly the intention
of Wittgenstein
and when you start to turn genuine
philosophical problems into concerns
over language you overly focus upon the
language and so then everything becomes
about the language
and I think we have important parallels
today to the kind of issues that Papa
was facing when he was debating
Wittgenstein back in Cambridge all those
years ago
this focus on language that Papa was
objecting to is precisely the concern
that some of our leading lights
intellectually today are concerned about
as well it's subtly different but it
comes from a similar place
we have people like Douglas Murray who
are concerned about real world problems
and people like Jordan Peterson who are
focused on real world problems but
they're both identified that the other
side is far too much focused on language
what people are saying what pronouns
people are using in the case of bacosian
and the SoCal hoax type people the fact
that language is obscuring meaning in so
many areas of Academia
a concern about what language is
permissible to use and what isn't rather
than a concern about genuine
philosophical or ethical problems it's a
concern about the use of language
so these old debates have very real
consequences for some of the political
concerns today
now the context for this story as I have
said can be found in wittgenstein's
poker so I'm drawing to a close now and
if you're really interested more about
the sociological forces
um that come to bear on this the the
book vitkenstein's poker by Edmunds and
ID now
um I strongly recommend and the
scientific and philosophical
consequences of of the missteps that
Wittgenstein made here I think are
covered very well in chapter 12 at the
beginning Infinity where David writes
about the effect bad philosophy has had
on science in particular on quantum
theory so that's another genuine
philosophical problem is instrumentalism
valid
um what if Annie is the advantage of
being a realist for a scientist wanting
to make progress okay but for now I'm
only up to chapter 10 of boy which will
be coming out in my next episode so I'll
have to wait a little while until I get
there to chapter 12. hopefully soon
thanks for listening
[Music]